---
layout: episode_notes
title: "18: A Tale of Two Kingdoms"
episodeIndex: 19
---
- Review
  - Preface: Gen 1-11
    - G-d loves his creation
  - Introduction
    - Introduced to the family of G-d
    - A family full of hutzpa who insists in the truth
    - Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph
  - Last week we took a break to ask some question:
    - What do we do with a god of wrath?
    - What do we do with Egypt and its narative as a metaphor? Egypt will become our first metaphor for this idea of empire.
- Ray Vander Laan's That the World May Know
  - Video #1
    - Ray points out that there are similarities between the Hebrew creation story and the Egyption creation story.
    - The main link between the Egyption people and their god is Pharoah.
    - The vault (or kartush) of water above and below is also an Egyption image of creation.
    - Pharoah is responsible maintaining order on behalf of the gods.
    - There are two competing naratives and Ray asks the question, "Have we bought into the wrong narative?"
      - Have we bought into the narative of fear? Have we put our trust in Pharoah? Have we put our trust into anyone other than G-d? 
      - There are people that are expendable and pushed to the edges when we try to keep the vault inside the kartush. The poor, sick, alien, elderly, etc.
      - "If you see a culture where life is cheap and sacrifice of other is acceptable to sustain your obsession with pleasure and entertainment and wealth, you have the wrong story." Ray
  - Video #2
    - Goshen, where the Israelites settled, is lush, green, and extremely fertile land.
    - Israelites we nomadic though and would move during the flood season.
    - The Israelites were actually given an incredible gift when they settled in Egypt.
    - Where would we say G-d is, in lush, green, full barley fields or in the desert? Would we choose the desert?
    - Pharoah provided the following for the Israelites
      - 10-day work weeks with a two or three day weekend
      - A generous middle class wage
      - Three room apartments
    - Israelites end up giving in to the Egyption narative
    - Egypt was the leading people group in metal work because they had state of the art furnaces and had figured out how to make the fire hotter.
      - Metal is used to make weapons and tools.
      - Israelites would have used the tools.
      - The slaves working the furnaces would have dropped like flies because of how hot the furnace was.
        - Life is expendable when you buy into the narative of Empire.
    - Eventually the people who bought into the narative of Empire end up finding themselves at the bottom of that Empire.
    - Pharaoh is typically found holding a staff over his slaves threatening him in hieroglyphics.
    - G-d ends up looking for someone to partner with even if that person isn't ready.
    - "We need to be people who hear the cry." Ray
    - G-d definitely hears the cry. When you're on the crying end, that's good news. When you're on the opporessive end, this is not good news for you.
  - Video #3
    - Introduction to the Exodus
    - Competition between G-d and the Egyptian gods.
      - The story about the sticks that turn into snakes.
        - Then Moses' "stick" or "staff" ate all of the other "sticks" or "staffs"
        - This is about Empire and the crooked staff versus the shepherds staff.
      - The finger of G-d: The plagues
        - G-d begins knocking out each of the Egyption gods, one by one.
    - Yeda means "to know"
      - Intimate or experiential knowing. "G-d wants to yeha your heart"
      - G-d says, I'm not made at the Egyptians or at Pharoah but that "I want the Egyptians and Pharoah to yeda that I am G-d"
      - G-d is really at war with the Egyptian gods.
      - The final Egyption god, the chief god, Amanrah was a goat, and G-d asks the Israelites to slaughter a goat and spread its blood on their door posts.
      - Many, but not all, Israelites end up choosing G-d narative.
      - Empire and Shalom are built on fundamentally different principles. You cannot have both and you cannot have a Godly empire.
