---
layout: episode_notes
title: "75: Silent Years — Welcome to Hellenism"
episodeIndex: 78
permalink: /ep/75
---

- What is the contact for the life of Jesus?
  - Judaism is different for Jesus than for the Babylonian Jews, David or Abraham. 
- Alexander the Great
  - More than a conquer. He had a euangelion. 
  - Greeks believed they had a new way that would change the world. 
  - Hellenism, based off of Hellis, centered the world on themselves and no longer on the gods. 
  - In most Greek myths, Greek gods have children with humans who overcome great hardship with the intelligence of gods and the strength of man. 
  - Do what you want. Get what you need.
  - Alexander the Great said he didn’t need a great army to conquor the world, he only needed for things: education, athletics, entertainment, and healthcare. 
  - Are these things evil? No but they come with a worldview. 
  - When Alexander dies he gives the Greek kingdom over to new rulers and Ptolemie roles over the Jews from 330-198 BC. 
  - The Hellenistic Seleucids overtake the Ptolemies and slaughter a pig on the altar of the Jews and the Jews revolt. 
  - Those Jews lead the Maccabean revolt.
  - This revolt becomes known as the miracle of Hanukkah. 
  - These Jews begin the Hasmonean Dynasty. 
  - The Maccabean rebels have the kingdom over to the priests. 
  - Within 20 years of turning the dynasty over to the Hasmonean priests, the priests became completely obsessed with Hellenism. 
  - At this point there weren’t even enough priests available to run Shabbat services because they were all at arenas and amphitheaters enjoying Hellenistic entertainment. 
  - These Jewish priests became known as the Sadducees. 
  - The Sadducees and Herodians believed they could enjoy Hellenistic comforts and also be completely devoted to God. 
  - The Hasmoneans resist this movement and move north from Jerusalem to the Galilee and become two distinct groups, the Pharisees and the Zealots. 
  - The Zealots armed themselves with the sword and the Parties armed themselves with obedience and devotion. 
  - Rome then conquered Judea. 
  - Even the Sadducees/Hasmoneans see Rome coming they begin planning how to keep from losing everything they had built during the last century so they pursue Herod who was the some of the kind of Edumea Nabatea. 
  - The Nabateans owned the spice trade, of the entire world. 
  - Herod inherited this spice trade and was unquestionably the richest person to ever live. 
  - Because Herod was the richest man in the world, they went to him so they can hold this great relationship with Rome in tension. 
  - Julius Caesar wanted Herod’s wealth and Herod offers it as an asset. 
  - When Herod dies in 4 BC, his kingdom is split between his sons. 
    - Herod Philip II rules in the north
    - Herod Archelaus rules in Judea
    - Herod Antipas rules in Galilee and East of the Dead Sea. 
  - Archelaus is a terrible ruler and Rome replaces him with Pontus Pilot
- The Essenes
  - They also couldn’t stand what was hiring either but they fled to the desert instead. 
- Discussion 
  - The problematic piece is making ourselves the center of the universe.
  - The other aspects of Hellenism like athletics, healthcare, entertainment, and education.
  - Questions
    - Head
      - Using a whiteboard, throw every aspect of our society where Hellenism shows up today.
      - Evaluate those things.
      - Is it right or wrong to participate in or enjoy the different pillars of Hellenism?
    - Heart
      - Where does Hellenism have its talons? Where does Hellenism, consumerism, me-centeredness, etc. show up in our lives? Where is it a problem?
    - Hands
      - What do we do about all of the different places where Hellenism has its talons?
      - Are there some (small) decisions or conclusions we can make about Hellenism and how we can weed it out? Is there any idolatry we can eliminate from our lives?
