---
layout: episode_notes
title: "81: Silent Years — Association"
episodeIndex: 84
permalink: /81
---

**The Set Time**

Galatians 4:4 _When the time was right, G-d sent Jesus…_

NIV “But when the set time had fully come, God sent his Son, born of a woman, born under the law…”

What was special about “that time?” Marty argues that it was because of Hellenism and its impact on individuals and their perspective on their worldview. Especially how they interact with others who believe differently than they do.

**Hellenistic Reponses Review**

<span style="text-decoration:underline;">Sadducees</span> 



- Positives: they are living out their priestly roles. Many protestant believers typically reject the idea of priesthood. Other more liturgical faiths like Catholicism and Lutheranism embrace priesthood much more freely. Is there space for protestants to honor the priesthood of all as well as the more formal priesthood of leaders? Honoring your leaders in Hebrews 13. Israel is called to be a Kingdom of Priests that ALSO had a tribe fully dedicated to priesthood. Are we aware that the role of the priest is something that G-d wants to use?
- Negatives: They are completely corrupt. None of us are immune to the struggles that the Sadducees faced.

What struggles do we share with the Sadducees?

<span style="text-decoration:underline;">Herodians</span>



- Positives: They are perfectly placed to engage the conversation and teach the world by our example and how we use the conveniences that Hellenism and consumerism has provided. 
- Negatives: They’re willing to compromise for their own pleasure. Most of us struggle to some degree with these conveniences. We assume consumption and it brings a degree of idolatry that we need to be aware of. Even those of us who are most dedicated to studying the Text struggle with some of these problems.

In what ways do we compromise our devotion to G-d because of our love of the conveniences of our lives?

<span style="text-decoration:underline;">Essenes</span>



- Positives: Complete and utter devotion to knowing the path and walking the path.
- Negatives: They were not in a position to engage the culture because they have isolated themselves and know nothing about it.

How do we isolate ourselves?

<span style="text-decoration:underline;">Zealots</span>



- Positives: They are zealous. We need zealots. In order to face all of the struggles in front of us, we need the zeal and passion to press forward.
- Negatives: The passion can lead Zealots to reach for the wrong tool when pressed too hard. It can be hard to say enough and follow G-d’s example who knows when to say enough.

What are some of the ways that we can temper the flames of zeal that burn those around us?

<span style="text-decoration:underline;">Pharisees</span>



- Positives: They are passionate about following the way and devoted to G-d’s commandments and desires.
- Negatives: They forgot that people were trying to do their best and lost any kind of empathy for others.

What specific opportunities do we have to be more empathetic to others?

<span style="text-decoration:underline;">American Evangelicalism</span>

We take the worst of the Herodians and the worst of the Pharisees and we smash them together. We are Spiritual Pharisees. We talk about who’s in and who’s out. Who’s right and who’s wrong. We are also Cultural Herodians. We love to embrace the consumerism of our culture to the fullest extent. 

We need to learn how to love people more and engage our culture in healthier ways.

Who agrees with Marty’s assessment that we are spiritual pharisees and cultural herodians–that we consume culture and lack compassion?

**Discussion**

